feat: add dark mode article (#1837)
NativeScript/docs: docs/ui/dark-mode.md

---
title: Dark Mode
description: The article describes the Dark Mode support in NativeScript.
position: 51
tags: nativescript dark mode, nativescript styling, nativescript css
slug: dark-mode
---

# Overview

Android 10 (API level 29) and iOS 13 introduce system-wide dark appearance for all user interface elements, known as [Dark theme](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/look-and-feel/darktheme) for Android and [Dark Mode](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/appkit/supporting_dark_mode_in_your_interface) for iOS. They have many benefits as to allow users to toggle their interface and focus on the application’s content based on ambient lighting conditions as well as to reduce power usage amount depending on the device's screen technology.

> ## Dark Theme for Android

Reviewer: We should state somewhere that by default if you do nothing, your app won't be affected by dark theme and that is fine.  Their old apps will still work without problems.

Author: Agree.

In order to support Dark theme for Android, the application's theme must inherit from a `DayNight` theme as explained [here](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/look-and-feel/darktheme#supporting_dark_theme_in_your_app).

However, Android 10 (API level 29) provides a feature for developers to quickly implement a Dark theme without explicitly setting a `DayNight` theme as mentioned. This features is called [Force Dark](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/look-and-feel/darktheme#force_dark).

Since release 6.2, NativeScript creates new applications with opt-in Force Dark functionality by default to provide support for Dark theme out of the box.

> The opt-in to Force Dark happens by setting `android:forceDarkAllowed` to `true` in the activity's theme. In particular, every project created by the NativeScript CLI 6.2 or later, contains the snippet below in the `<project>/app/App_Recoures/Android/src/main/res/values/styles.xml` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Force Dark is enabled by setting `android:forceDarkAllowed` to `true` in the activity's theme. In particular, every project created by the NativeScript CLI 6.2 or later, contains the snippet below in the `<project>/app/App_Recoures/Android/src/main/res/values/styles.xml` file:
```

Alternatively use `opt in` instead of `opt-in`. One is

```xml
    ...

    <!-- theme to use AFTER launch screen is loaded-->
    <style name="AppThemeBase" parent="Theme.AppCompat.Light.NoActionBar">
        <item name="android:forceDarkAllowed">true</item>
        <item name="toolbarStyle">@style/NativeScriptToolbarStyle</item>

        <item name="colorPrimary">@color/ns_primary</item>
        <item name="colorPrimaryDark">@color/ns_primaryDark</item>
        <item name="colorAccent">@color/ns_accent</item>
    </style>

    <style name="AppTheme" parent="AppThemeBase">
    </style>

    ...
```

> Important: Make sure to test your application carefully and thoroughly on both Light and Dark system appearance.

> > Note: If you want to update your project to opt-in to Force Dark, it is needed to put the following line in the `<project>/app/App_Recoures/Android/src/main/res/values/styles.xml` file as shown above: `<item name="android:forceDarkAllowed">true</item>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: If you want to update your project to opt in to Force Dark, it is needed to put the following line in the `<project>/app/App_Recoures/Android/src/main/res/values/styles.xml` file as shown above: `<item name="android:forceDarkAllowed">true</item>`.
```

## Dark Mode for iOS

> For iOS, the Dark mode is opt-in by default and every application built with Xcode 11 or above tooling, automatically support both Light and Dark system appearances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For iOS, the Dark mode is enabled by default and every application built with Xcode 11 or above tooling, automatically reacts to system appearance changes.
```
`opt-in` with a dash means `optional`. Also, I think `support` is a strong word here.

Reviewer: We should stress here that if your app was built with {N} pre-6.2 it will not react to dark mode and it will be fine. Their apps won't be broken automatically.

Author: Important to note! However, the app might be broken (as the Preview app for example).

The support in NativeScript framework has come since version 6.2 where the complete set of native widgets has been adapted to work out of the box for the.

> However, if the your application need extra time to work on its dark Mode support, you can opt out by including the `UIUserInterfaceStyle` key in the application's the `<project>/app/App_Recoures/iOS/Info.plist` file:

Reviewer 2: However, if you need extra time to work on your application's dark Mode support

> However, if you need extra time to work on your application's dark Mode support, you can opt out by including the `UIUserInterfaceStyle` key in the application's the `<project>/app/App_Recoures/iOS/Info.plist` file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, if you need extra time to work on your application's Dark Mode support, you can opt out by including the `UIUserInterfaceStyle` key in the application's the `<project>/app/App_Recoures/iOS/Info.plist` file:
```

```xml
    ...

    <key>UIUserInterfaceStyle</key>
	<string>Light</string>

    ...
```

> Important: Make sure to test your application carefully and thoroughly on both Light and Dark system appearance.

## How Does It Work

> Since version 6.2, NativeScript detects the system appearance of the running mobile operating system and applies a respective CSS class to the application's [root view](https://docs.nativescript.org/ui/styling#root-views-css-classes). In particular, if you run the application on iOS 13.0 in Light mode, a `.ns-light` CSS class will be assign to the root view of your application. In analogy, if you change the system appearance from Light to Dark, the `.ns-light` class will be replaced with `.ns-dark` and vice verse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since version 6.2, NativeScript detects the system appearance of the running mobile operating system and applies a respective CSS class to the application's [root view](https://docs.nativescript.org/ui/styling#root-views-css-classes). In particular, if you run the application on iOS 13.0 in Light mode, a `.ns-light` CSS class will be assigned to the root view of your application. In analogy, if you change the system appearance from Light to Dark, the `.ns-light` class will be replaced with `.ns-dark` and vice verse.
```

> Since version 6.2, NativeScript detects the system appearance of the running mobile operating system and applies a respective CSS class to the application's [root view](https://docs.nativescript.org/ui/styling#root-views-css-classes). In particular, if you run the application on iOS 13.0 in Light mode, a `.ns-light` CSS class will be assign to the root view of your application. In analogy, if you change the system appearance from Light to Dark, the `.ns-light` class will be replaced with `.ns-dark` and vice verse.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In analogy, if you change the system appearance from Light to Dark, the `.ns-light` class will be replaced with `.ns-dark` and vice versa.
```

> Since version 6.2, NativeScript detects the system appearance of the running mobile operating system and applies a respective CSS class to the application's [root view](https://docs.nativescript.org/ui/styling#root-views-css-classes). In particular, if you run the application on iOS 13.0 in Light mode, a `.ns-light` CSS class will be assign to the root view of your application. In analogy, if you change the system appearance from Light to Dark, the `.ns-light` class will be replaced with `.ns-dark` and vice verse.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since version 6.2, NativeScript detects the system appearance of the running mobile operating system and applies a respective CSS class to the application's [root view](https://docs.nativescript.org/ui/styling#root-views-css-classes). In particular, if you run the application on iOS 13.0 in Light mode, a `.ns-light` CSS class will be assign to the root view of your application. In analogy, if you change the system appearance from Light to Dark, the `.ns-light` class will be replaced with `.ns-dark` and vice versa.
```

> To illustrate this behavior, the sample CSS styles below will apint the Pages of your application in *light blue* color on Light system appearance and in *dark blue* on dark system appearance:

Reviewer 2: apint -> paint

```css

> .ns-light Page {

Reviewer: Using an example with a `Page` is not a good idea if this article will be shown on the Angular docs as well. There is no Page there. Using a `Button` is the safest option generally, because the button is a button everywhere, even in web html.

Author: + mind the `host-context()` scope

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean, but this article will be shown for Angular too and there we don't use the `Page` component there.

    background-color: lightblue;
}

.ns-dark Page {
    background-color: darkblue;
}
```

In addition, the application module provides `systemAppearance` property and `systemAppearanceChanged` event. Through, them you could easily detect the current system appearance mode and update application behavior or style on a change.

## NativeScript Theme Integration

The NativeScript Theme provides beautiful look and feel of your application for both Light and Dark system appearances. Please, refer to the Theme article for more information.

> <!-- TODO: add a link to the theme article -->

Reviewer: We are currently referring to the Readme in the github repo. I'm not sure the doc article will be ready for the release.
